<div class=Section1>

<h1><b>Let There Be Light<o:p></o:p></b></h1>

<p class=MsoNormal style='text-align:left;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span
style='font-size:28.0pt;font-family:"Monotype Corsiva";color:#993366;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>After a long period when Jews and Roma (Gypsies)
were not tolerated in Szeged, the first Jewish family settled there in 1781. By
1791, an organized community emerged. Two scholarly rabbis led the <i>kehillah</i>
in Szeged, Leopold Loew (1811 –1875) and his son Imannuel Loew (1854 – 1944). <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>Leopold Loew’s term as rabbi (1850-1875) coincided
with a period of political and intellectual ferment in central Europe that
affected the Jewish community as well. Rabbi Loew led his <i>kehillah </i>in
changes, such as delivering sermons in Hungarian. Moreover, he was a strong
advocate of civil rights for Jews in Hungary. He maintained a careful balance
when introducing religious reforms in order to stay within the framework of
Jewish tradition. His research covered such varied topics as Jewish
antiquities, folklore and the history of Hungarian Jewry.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>The women of the Szeged <i>kehillah</i> were active
in addressing communal needs: some prepared food in a food kitchen for the
poor; some provided brides’ necessities and also covered hospitalization for
indigents. Szeged Jews kept a strong bond with other Jewish communities,
especially in times of stress. They contributed money in 1857 for destitute
Jews in Palestine and, among other locations, for Jews in Persia in 1872. Later,
these donations continued and were not displaced by the monthly contributions
to Keren Hayesod to aid settlement in Palestine. Jews extended their support to
needy Christians as well, providing shelter during World War I to refugee
orphans from Germany. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>Szeged’s <i>kehillah</i> became a major center of
the Neolog movement around 1900. The community did not split apart because its
Orthodox minority chose to remain with the Neolog majority out of love and
respect for the Loew rabbinical family. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><u><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>The synagogue building.</span></u><span
style='font-family:Verdana;mso-fareast-language:EN-US'> The <i>kehillah</i>
received a permit to build its first synagogue in 1803, limited by church
authorities to a small size. By mid-century, the city allowed the construction
of a larger synagogue on condition that it be surrounded with a fence and
topped with a chimney to resemble a dwelling, and thus, less noticeable to
Szeged’s Christians. The building proved inadequate for a Jewish population
that grew to nearly 6,000 as the 20<sup>th</sup> century approached. They
needed a synagogue of much larger dimensions, but they also wanted a design
commensurate with their emancipation and their new economic status. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>After an architects’ competition, an eclectic
design by Lipot Baumhorn was chosen. In 1903, he completed the Szeged
synagogue, the brightest jewel in the crown of 24 synagogues that he built in
greater Hungary. Rabbi Imannuel Loew, who received his father’s pulpit in 1878
and remained active until 1944, was a guiding spirit in the design of the
synagogue. The fruit of the collaboration between rabbi and architect can be
seen in our photos. Some of Rabbi Loew’s scholarly work focused on Biblical
flora and fauna. Thus, he was the source for the floral motifs and Jewish
symbols in the synagogue decoration.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>It is noteworthy that post-World War I
cross-religious activity reached a high level, with visiting clergy preaching
in synagogues and rabbis invited to sermonize in cathedrals. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>During the anti-Jewish violence in 1921, called the
White Terror—with an estimated 3,000 dead—Rabbi Loew was imprisoned for 13
months on an accusation of having maligned the fascist head of state, Admiral
Horthy. Rabbi Loew exploited his time in jail to research his book, <i>Die
Flora der Juden, </i>(The Plants of the Jews) on the botany of the Bible. From
1927 on, he served in the national parliament as the representative of Neolog
Jewry.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>In 1932, Zionist activity, including Hashomer
Hatzair,<i> </i>WIZO and Hechalutz movements spurted briefly ahead. However,
because of conversions and the low birth rate, the Jewish population<i> </i>declined
by about 40% between the wars to about 4,000 in 1941. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>In pre-World War II Hungary, a sympathetic police
chief quietly notified Jewish community heads in advance of impending hostile
actions and tried to help circumvent them. By May 1944, after the Nazi
invasion, Szeged Jews were herded into a ghetto set up around the synagogue
square. The police dragged Jewish women through the streets from the ghetto to
prison, where midwives stripped them and searched their bodies for hidden
jewels. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>Cardinal Seredy tried in vain to mobilize Hungarian
clergy for rescue work, but he succeeded only in preventing the expulsion of
200 baptized Jews. Ninety-year-old Rabbi Loew was marched off with others to
work in the ghetto brick factory. In June, troops liquidated the ghetto and
loaded the Jews onto Auschwitz-bound trains. The transport stopped briefly in
Budapest, where alert Jews smuggled Rabbi Loew off the train and got him to the
ghetto hospital. He died there after a brief respite.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>After the war, people came out of bunkers and
hiding places; some returned from the death camps. The Joint Distribution
Committee was able to help the 2,000 Jews of the Szeged area in reestablishing
their community. They reclaimed the synagogue, from storeroom to community use,
and restored the old age home. The orphanage absorbed 400 new orphans from
Budapest. Nevertheless, by the early 1990s, a diminished community numbered
only a few hundred. It uses the <i>bet midrash</i> for prayer and study and
keeps the synagogue open as a museum.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>On a festive day in September 1989, the community
and hundreds of guests from Budapest and elsewhere rededicated the synagogue,
newly renovated with the help of a donation from a former resident. The
profusion of towers and delicate window traceries lends a festive character to
the façade, behind the ground plantings of mature yews and pyramid oaks.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;direction:ltr;
unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-size:8.0pt;font-family:Verdana;
mso-fareast-language:EN-US'>Condensed by Tzipora Heckelman from <i>Synagogues
Without Jews.</i></span><span style='font-family:Verdana;mso-fareast-language:
EN-US'><o:p></o:p></span></p>

</div>

