<div class=Section1>

<h2><b><span style='font-size:28.0pt;color:#993366'>The Finer Wines of Tokaj<o:p></o:p></span></b></h2>

<p class=MsoNormal style='text-align:left;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span
style='font-size:28.0pt;font-family:"Monotype Corsiva"'><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>Tokaj
is located in northeastern Hungary, in the Zemplen district, where the Bodroy
and Tisza Rivers intersect. The area is famous for its fine wine---and the
first Jews who settled here were wine merchants. Their settlement, which began
in the 17<sup>th</sup> century, was curtailed in 1680 when a national uprising
caused the whole district to be looted and burned by the army of Ferenc R k¢czi
II. Jews, in particular, suffered from the actions of the occupying army and
were eventually driven out by the general instability of the town.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>Jews
began returning to Tokaj in the 18<sup>th</sup> century. Again, they focused on
wine production by leasing vineyards and wine cellars, and they were very
successful, so successful, that they managed to arouse their neighbors&#8217;
jealousy. In 1798 the Jews were forbidden to produce high-quality wine and in
1800 they were forbidden to lease or buy vineyards in Tokaj, save for one area
in the district.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>The
Jews prospered in Tokaj despite the odds against them,. They owned large houses
in the city&#8217;s center, established several community-run philanthropic
organizations and constructed a beautiful synagogue, one of the ten largest in
Hungary. By the mid-19<sup>th</sup> century, the Jews had branched out into
other business ventures. A match factory was opened in 1879 and there were
Jewish banks which financed industrial enterprises. For the most part, the Jews
of Tokaj worked as merchants and artisans, but there were some who served as
physicians, lawyers, and clerks.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>The
community was Orthodox. It had its own school, where they taught religion and
tradition while still placing an emphasis on Hungarian patriotism. The Tokaj
authorities must have had some interest in the Jewish school, because by 1888
the language of instruction was changed from German to Hungarian and the
teachers had to be certified. The relationship between the Jews and Christians
also improved over time. The Jews faced little discrimination before World War
II, and even after the war began they maintained a normal way of life until the
German occupation.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>In
the 1930s Tokaj became an important center for Zionist activity. While most of
the middle-class did not personally consider <i>aliyah</i>, they supported the
Zionist movement through their efforts to collect money and to publish its
philosophy. For the young Jews of Tokaj there was a youth movement, <i>Barisia</i>,
which inspired some immigration to Palestine.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>By
1938, the Jewish community numbered close to 1,000, in a total population of
5,903. That year, when the Discriminatory Laws were passed to limit Jewish
economic activity, the Jews were still able to hold onto their businesses
through the help of Christian partners. The situation changed when Germany
occupied Hungary in 1939. Jewish men over 40 were conscripted to forced labor at
work camps all over Hungary. Many wealthy members of the Tokaj community were
put into concentration camps in Kistarcsa. <o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;text-indent:
36.0pt;direction:ltr;unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-family:Verdana'>In
April of 1944, all the Jews of Tokaj were forced into a ghetto composed of
their own synagogue and yeshivas. By May they were taken to other cities in the
area, and eventually transported to Auschwitz. When the war ended, only 112
Jews returned to Tokaj. Of these, only three Jews remained by 1960. One of
them, Lajos Lowy, tried to restore the synagogue. A great deal of progress was
made on the project in the early 1990s, but it stalled in an unfinished state
for lack of funds. The building is occasionally used for special events.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-align:left;direction:ltr;
unicode-bidi:embed'><span style='font-size:8.0pt;font-family:Verdana'>Page by
Bryna Rothenberg, Shlomo Sneh and Francine Shapiro. </span></p>

</div>

