<div class=Section1>

<h1><b>When our ships brought profit<o:p></o:p></b></h1>

<p class=MsoNormal><span style='font-size:28.0pt;font-family:"Monotype Corsiva";
color:#993366'><![if !supportEmptyParas]>&nbsp;<![endif]><o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-indent:36.0pt'><span
style='font-family:Verdana'>Dubrovnik, also known as Rhacusa or Ragusa, is a
port city situated on the Adriatic Coast of Croatia. The Jewish community there
goes back as far as 1352, although their presence then was barely tolerated and
they were initially denied residence. When Jews did secure residence in
Dubrovnik, they became successful traders and helped in the commercial and
maritime development of the city. Their success was due in part to the
connections they had in Turkey and Italy. By the 16<sup>th</sup> century, they
controlled most of the trade with those regions.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-indent:36.0pt'><span
style='font-family:Verdana'>The 16<sup>th</sup> century also saw an increase in
the size of the <i>kehillah</i>, after the expulsions from Spain and Portugal
brought many Jews to Dubrovnik. This influx did not sit well with the local
Christians and a blood libel was fabricated against the community, one of
several that would be thrown at them over the next few centuries. This time the
libel resulted in the executions of seven men and the prohibition of trading in
port. Eventually the prohibition was overturned, but the Jewish traders were
always excessively taxed by the city and they always retained the civic-status
of foreigners, never citizens.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-indent:36.0pt'><span
style='font-family:Verdana'>Despite the prejudices they faced, the Jews still
took pride in their heritage. In 1538, with only 40 people in the community,
they organized themselves into a <i>Universitas Haebreorum</i>, with a consul
to lead them. In 1750 the problem of who would get one of the four seats of
honor near the Holy Ark became such a heated debate that the Dubrovnik authorities
had to be called in to settle the dispute. Their solution was to sell each seat
for 20 gold pieces--a fee that would then go into the city’s coffers to help
them pay for the repair of <i>their</i> cathedral square. That payment would be
good for the buyer’s lifetime, and at his death the seat would be sold again.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-indent:36.0pt'><span
style='font-family:Verdana'>In 1808, with the French occupying the area, all
racial discrimination laws were abolished. This boon to the Jews was marred,
however, because of a French sea blockade that interfered with trade. When
their new freedoms were revoked again by France’s defeat in 1814, the
prominence of Dubrovnik’s port was lost for good. In the 1830s, the Jews
shifted their energies from trade to viniculture with substantial success, but
they faced another setback in 1880 when disease struck their vineyards.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;text-indent:36.0pt'><span
style='font-family:Verdana'>The rise of Nazism in Europe during the late 1930’s
brought Jewish refugees to an impoverished Dubrovnik <i>kehillah</i>. The
Italian military took over the city in autumn of 1941, and, despite heavy
pressure, resisted transferring the Jews over to German jurisdiction. In June
1943, the Italians shipped the Jews to a concentration camp on the Adriatic
island of Rab. When Italy fell that November, many of the island’s internees
joined the partisans in the struggle against the Nazis. They were then sent to
the battlefront, where they suffered 200 deaths. After the war 23 Jews returned
to the city.<o:p></o:p></span></p>

<p class=MsoBodyTextIndent>In spite of the odds against it, the synagogue in
Dubrovnik stands today, largely due to the watchfulness of its congregation.
When the Germans entered the city in 1943 one of its members spirited out most
of its treasures and left them in the care of Christian friends. In 1991, the
synagogue survived the artillery and shelling that erupted during the war
between Serbia and Croatia. Now, the community has grown from 23 to 47 members.
They have plans for restoring the building and opening a Jewish museum. </p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-bottom:12.0pt;tab-stops:517.4pt'><span
style='font-size:8.0pt;font-family:Verdana'>Condensed by Bryna Rothenberg from <i>Synagogues
Without Jews.<o:p></o:p></i></span></p>

</div>

